834 user guide creating a dataset for lumigator evaluations summarization (#994)
mozilla-ai/lumigator: docs/source/user-guides/prepare-evaluation-dataset.md

# Preparing your own evaluation dataset

> If you need more information about what this is and why, check this page first.

Author: Pointing to the conceptual guide instead... 

```suggestion
If you need more information about what an evaluation dataset is and why it's important, check [this page](../conceptual-guides/datasets.md) first.
```

This guide will walk you through the process of preparing your own evaluation dataset
for Lumigator to help see the differences in performance of multiple Language Models for your own use case, rather than a generic benchmark.

This guide will cover the format Lumigator expects, what to focus on when collecting appropriate content and, lastly, how to upload and check your resulting file is valid.

## Format

Lumigator expects a CSV file containing different columns depending on the use case. Currently:

* Summarization use case

Your CSV should contain `examples` and `ground_truth`. See an example [here](../../../lumigator/sample_data/dialogsum_exc.csv ).

> * Translation use case

Author: I was hoping for this to go in right after translation went in, happy to have #946 handle it.

Here you will have a source language (that you translate from) and a target language (that you translate to).

> Your CSV should contain `examples_$SRC_LAN` and `ground_truth_$TAR_LAN`.

Author: Is this what we're sticking to @HareeshBahuleyan or is there a different format?

Reviewer: As of now we are still using `examples`, `ground_truth` for translation as well. But in the long run, it would be nice to be able to let users bring a dataset with any column names, and then we ask them at during experiment setup - which column they want to use as input and which as output (but this will be in Iteration-3 or so, till then it will be the same column names as summarization).

Author: Got it, so for now we keep `examples, ground_truth` and will update documentation if/when relevant.

Author: ```suggestion
Your CSV should still contain `examples` (in the source language) and `ground_truth` (the ideal translation to the target language).
```

> In the column names below, please ensure you replace the placeholders `$SRC_LAN` and `$TAR_LAN` with [ISO 639 2-character language codes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_ISO_639_language_codes).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the column names above, please ensure you replace the placeholders `$SRC_LAN` and `$TAR_LAN` with [ISO 639 2-character language codes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_ISO_639_language_codes).
```

Author: Deferred to #946 .

## Content

To prepare the samples that will actually be part of your dataset, you must collect, curate and annotate.

### 1. Collect

If you already have a system running, whether it already uses Language Models to summarize or not, automatically save examples that go into that system If there are humans or a high-quality process that already summarizes or translates these examples, collect those output summaries together with the input text.

```{note}
Ensure you are legally allowed and have collected consent from your users to collect this data.
```

At the end of this step, that depending on your workflow may take anywhere between minutes and months, you should have a list of as many examples as possible of at least original texts from your domain.

#### How many do you need?

> Unfortunately, there is no clear-cut answer to this. Not as many as if you were training or fine-tuning a model, but remember: the more examples, the more likely it is that a model score was not a fluke.

Author: Hm, note that it is also important to emphasize quantity. I'll mention both.

#### Example output

> Ideally you will end up with a text file or a spreadsheet with dozens (or hundreds or thousands) of examples. Let's imagine you are building an app that summarizes patient history. Your examples might look like:

Reviewer 3: Hmm. Since we call "examples" the input data, I think we may want to avoid using the term "example" to refer to the output prediction of the model. Personally I don't love the "examples" and "ground truth" naming that we currently follow (I'd prefer it be more generic like "source" and "target") but we don't have to figure that part out in this pr 😆 
```suggestion
Ideally you will end up with a text file or a spreadsheet with dozens (or hundreds or thousands) of examples. Let's imagine you are building an app that summarizes patient history. The predictions generated by a model may look like:
```

Author: These are not the predictions, they are the input text from users (`examples`). It's the data collection step :)

    Patient J: 38-year-old female with thyroid nodule. Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration and cytology were inconclusive. Surgical biopsy and frozen section analysis during surgery diagnosed papillary thyroid carcinoma. Treatment: Total thyroidectomy followed by radioactive iodine therapy.

    Patient K: 38-year-old woman presented with a thyroid mass. Initial diagnostic attempts using ultrasound-directed thin-needle sampling and cell examination yielded ambiguous results. Definitive diagnosis of papillary thyroid cancer was achieved through surgical tissue extraction and rapid intraoperative pathological assessment. The patient underwent complete removal of the thyroid gland, followed by treatment with radioiodine.

    Patient L: 38-year-old woman with thyroid mass. Ultrasound-directed thin-needle sampling and cell examination were inconclusive, later surgical tissue extraction and rapid intraoperative pathological assessment. Diagnosis: papillary thyroid cancer. Treatment was complete removal of the thyroid gland, followed by radioiodine therapy.

```

> Notice at this point we do not know what an ideal summary of this would be.

Reviewer 3: This sentence doesn't totally make sense, I may not be completely following what this section is explaining 😰

Author: Got it - rephrasing to:

> In this step, we are not adding ground truth, that is, we will not add what an ideal summary of each of those examples is.

### 2. Curate

This is the most time-intensive phase. Summon all your domain knowledge: which of those examples are basically the same as others? A few slightly paraphrased examples will help expose models, but if your whole dataset is built over 1000 ways of saying the same thing, the evaluation may not be the best.

> For example, continuing with the example above, notice how similar the last 3 examples are. You might decide that only 1 is representative enough. You might also want to leave Patient J and K, since it may be good to check that the model also understands longer form writing, as in Patient K.

Reviewer 3: Ahhhh. I think I'm following now: this section and the one previous are explaining how to crowd-source/generate a dataset? This seems like a pretty complicated topic that we may want to avoid trying to explain. Something like this may be better suited for a blog post instead of our documentation. I don't know if we want to get into the business of explaining to a user how to create the data for the dataset, beyond explaining how to format the data they have into something that Lumigator can use.

Author: I do see where you're coming from... but since we are supporting mostly (for now) folks who may not be used to creating datasets and we have several workshops coming up, there is a need for a guide somewhere close to the code.

I have opted to separate conceptual guide from user guide - let's see if that works out.

    * Is there any seasonality in your data?
    For example, in the patient information example above: could that group of people who use a specific vocabulary only come in during internships in the Summer? Were you collecting examples from those dates?
    * Are all your users represented in your data?
    Beware of only choosing samples from one or two of your users. You could find that the model you select fails miserably when, in production, it needs to work for everyone.
* Are there enough samples? See the comment above.
* Are you selecting examples of all difficulties?
Be careful not to only choose examples that are either easy or hard to summarize, you want examples of all types.
* Could you be cheating?
If your data was involved in the training or fine-tuning of any of the models you are evaluating, do make sure only new, unseen data is present in the evaluation dataset.
Following the exam analogy, allowing samples to be shared between training and evaluation is similar to slipping a student a list of right answers before the exam (learn more about data leakage here).
* Do you have quality ground truth?

> 

Reviewer 3: Similar to my previous comment: I think this is awesome information but I'm not sure whether this is something we want in the Lumigator docs? It helps to explain how you would create a good dataset, but currently my understanding of Lumigator is that we're helping to run evaluations but not necessarily tell people how to create data for evaluation. An excellent topic for a blogpost though.

Author: See [above](https://github.com/mozilla-ai/lumigator/pull/994#discussion_r1970315848).

### 3. Annotate (optional in Lumigator, but very strongly encouraged)

> Ground truth (i.e. the ideal output of the task for each example, as imagined by a human expert) is crucial to evaluate an LLM. Lumigator allows you to upload a dataset with only the input column and later annotate the dataset with a high-quality Language Model, but nobody has vetted that LLM for your use case: we cannot guarantee it knows as much about your business as you do.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Ground truth (i.e. the ideal output of the task for each example, as imagined by a human expert) is crucial to evaluate an LLM. Lumigator allows you to upload a dataset with only the input column and later annotate the dataset with a high-quality Language Model, but nobody has vetted that model for your use case: we cannot guarantee it knows as much about your business as you do.
```
We currently have hardcoded the BART model, which isn't an LLM imo

Author: The definition of Large varies. Let's be neutral and leave it at Language Model all around then :)

Author: ```suggestion
Ground truth (i.e. the ideal output of the task for each example, as imagined by a human expert) is crucial to evaluate a Language Model. Lumigator allows you to upload a dataset with only the input column and later annotate the dataset with a high-quality Language Model, but nobody has vetted that Language Model for your use case: we cannot guarantee it knows as much about your business as you do.
```

> Ground truth (i.e. the ideal output of the task for each example, as imagined by a human expert) is crucial to evaluate an LLM. Lumigator allows you to upload a dataset with only the input column and later annotate the dataset with a high-quality Language Model, but nobody has vetted that LLM for your use case: we cannot guarantee it knows as much about your business as you do.

Reviewer 3: I agree that using the term 'input' makes more sense, but that's not currently our naming convention
```suggestion
Ground truth (i.e. the ideal output of the task for each example, as imagined by a human expert) is crucial to evaluate an LLM. Lumigator allows you to upload a dataset with only the examples column and later annotate the dataset with a high-quality Language Model, but nobody has vetted that LLM for your use case: we cannot guarantee it knows as much about your business as you do.
```

Reviewer 2: Perhaps we can even backquote `examples` so it is clear it's the actual column name

Author: Yup, done!

"Patient J: 38-year-old female with thyroid nodule. Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration and cytology were inconclusive. Surgical biopsy and frozen section analysis during surgery diagnosed papillary thyroid carcinoma. Treatment: Total thyroidectomy followed by radioactive iodine therapy.","38F, thyroid cancer confirmed through surgical biopsy, treated with thyroidectomy and radioiodine."
"Patient K: 38-year-old woman presented with a thyroid mass. Initial diagnostic attempts using ultrasound-directed thin-needle sampling and cell examination yielded ambiguous results. Definitive diagnosis of papillary thyroid cancer was achieved through surgical tissue extraction and rapid intraoperative pathological assessment. The patient underwent complete removal of the thyroid gland, followed by treatment with radioiodine.","38F, thyroid cancer confirmed through surgical biopsy, treated with thyroidectomy and radioiodine."
```

> ## Validate your dataset file

Reviewer 3: General comment: This guide is explaining how to populate a CSV file, but I'm not sure that most people are going to be creating datasets in CSV format? Having to escape out newline characters, commas, etc, make it not the nicest format for data handling. I imagine most people are going to do most data prep as a pandas Dataframe, a json file, or a HF datasets file, and then dump it to CSV once it's usable. 

I'm not sure if it would be more useful to explain the concept of what each column is, accompanied by information about how they can convert the data from a pandas DF or HF dataset into the csv file that we currently require (TODO maybe we should also support uploading json, jsonl, pq, arrow since we use arrow in the backend anyways)

Author: I was wondering about that. In earlier gigs I saw data scientists created dataframes (or CSVs/TSVs), backend/data/ml engineers tended towards json or, later, hf datasets and almost everyone else (particularly less data-oriented folks) went for spreadsheets.

I think people used to wrangling dataframes, jsons or arrow don't need this guide anyway - what they'd need is a schema. 

For the ones who benefit from the guide, I'd like to offer them an easy single path (single = few or no decisions and branches). Wdyt: shall we assume spreadsheet and help them export to CSV or do you see something simpler?

100% on needing to expand to json, jsonl, pq, arrow (we deal with arrow internally anyway).

Reviewer 2: +1 on assuming spreadsheet or, more generally, we can show how we expect the first two lines of the file to be, but without entering the detail of how to build them. We can then say "we chose CSV as it is a format you can easily export to both programmatically and from spreadsheet applications". wdyt?

Author: Went with:

(In the collection section)

> Feel free to collect your data into the format you are most comfortable with during your usual work. Bear in mind at the end you will have to export to CSV, but we do not encourage manually editing CSVs.
> 
> People manually collecting data may choose a spreadsheet, although if your workflow allows it, we encourage using JSON, JSONL, Pandas dataframes or HuggingFace datasets to automatically collect your data in.

and a reminder on the last step:

> Regardless of the format you have been collecting your data in (spreadsheet, JSON, JSONL, HuggingFace datasets...), at the end of this final step, you will need to export to CSV.

Now that you have a dataset (let's assume it's `my_dataset.csv`), let's upload it to Lumigator and check everything is fine.

> You can do this via the UI or, as below, via the SDK.

Author: Add link to the UI guide.

## What You'll Need

- A running instance of [Lumigator](../get-started/quickstart.md).

## Procedure

1. Install the Lumigator SDK:

    ```console
    user@host:~/lumigator$ uv pip install -e lumigator/sdk
    ```

1. Create a new Python file:

    ```console
    user@host:~/lumigator$ touch upload_dataset.py
    ```

> 1. Add the following code to `upload_dataset.py`:

Reviewer 2: I'd collapse the two points above:

1. add the following code to a new python file called `upload_dataset`.py

(rationale: I think it might be easier to just open an editor and save to a new file rather than touch+edit, but it's subjective)

Author: Fair point!

### 1. Collect

If you already have a system running, whether it already uses Language Models to summarize or not, automatically save examples that go into that system If there are humans or a high-quality process that already summarizes or translates these examples, collect those output summaries together with the input text.

```{note}
Ensure you are legally allowed and have collected consent from your users to collect this data.
```

At the end of this step, that depending on your workflow may take anywhere between minutes and months, you should have a list of as many examples as possible of at least original texts from your domain.

#### How many do you need?

Unfortunately, there is no clear-cut answer to this. Not as many as if you were training or fine-tuning a model, but remember: the more examples, the more likely it is that a model score was not a fluke.

#### Example output

Ideally you will end up with a text file or a spreadsheet with dozens (or hundreds or thousands) of examples. Let's imagine you are building an app that summarizes patient history. Your examples might look like:

> ```

Author: Add the source of these examples.

    Patient L: 38-year-old woman with thyroid mass. Ultrasound-directed thin-needle sampling and cell examination were inconclusive, later surgical tissue extraction and rapid intraoperative pathological assessment. Diagnosis: papillary thyroid cancer. Treatment was complete removal of the thyroid gland, followed by radioiodine therapy.

```

Notice at this point we do not know what an ideal summary of this would be.

### 2. Curate

This is the most time-intensive phase. Summon all your domain knowledge: which of those examples are basically the same as others? A few slightly paraphrased examples will help expose models, but if your whole dataset is built over 1000 ways of saying the same thing, the evaluation may not be the best.

For example, continuing with the example above, notice how similar the last 3 examples are. You might decide that only 1 is representative enough. You might also want to leave Patient J and K, since it may be good to check that the model also understands longer form writing, as in Patient K.

Your outcome then would be the list as above, minus Patient L.

> ### What to consider while you are curating?

Author: Is this the friendliest of formats...?

Author: Leaving it as-is in the conceptual guide.

* Could you be cheating?
If your data was involved in the training or fine-tuning of any of the models you are evaluating, do make sure only new, unseen data is present in the evaluation dataset.
Following the exam analogy, allowing samples to be shared between training and evaluation is similar to slipping a student a list of right answers before the exam (learn more about data leakage here).
* Do you have quality ground truth?

### 3. Annotate (optional in Lumigator, but very strongly encouraged)

Ground truth (i.e. the ideal output of the task for each example, as imagined by a human expert) is crucial to evaluate an LLM. Lumigator allows you to upload a dataset with only the input column and later annotate the dataset with a high-quality Language Model, but nobody has vetted that LLM for your use case: we cannot guarantee it knows as much about your business as you do.

If you do have human experts who were able to go through the input data from step #2 and add their annotations, you should end up with a file with the same list of examples, plus the annotation after a comma. Such as the following content:

```
examples,ground_truth

> "examples,ground_truth

Author: ```suggestion
```
